Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Herman Ponzer. He's professor
of evolutionary Anthropology and Global Health at the Global
Health Institute at Duke University. And today we're talking
about his book Adaptable, How Your Unique Body really
Works and why our Biology unites us. So, Doctor
Ponzer, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Thanks for having me. I'm excited to be here.
So in the book you talk a lot about
biological diversity, specifically in humans and where it stems
from. So, uh, tell us first about that. Where
does biological diversity in humans stem from and why
do you think it is important to consider it?
Yeah. So, uh, you know, it's the standard nature
and nurture, uh, story, but I think it's one
that we don't tell in the right way. And
we kind of, you know, sort of don't, don't
do it well. And so, uh, you know, the
reason that we're all unique biologically, uh, is that,
first of all, we've all got our own unique
set of, of genes. So, there are about 20,000
protein coding genes and there's a lot of thousands
of others that regulate, turn those genes on and
off. And, you know, in any population, there might
be 4 or 5 versions of each of those,
you know, 20, 30,000 genes. And so the chance
that you have exactly the same set of variants
that I do is basically zero unless we're identical
twins. And then even if we were identical twins,
that's where the, the, where the nurture comes in,
the environment comes in. As we grow up and
grow old, um, our life, you know, actually turn,
turns on and off some of those genes that
don't all expressed the same way. Um, OUR bodies,
even if we had the same kind of genetic
pathways activated, we're built to learn and we're built
to adapt to our environments as we grow up.
And so, you know, very quickly after birth, uh,
you know, even two identical twins would have, you
know, slightly different biologies and, and by the time
they're 4 or 5 years old, it's, it's, it's
significant. So, um, the genetics and the environment, no,
no two sets are alike, and that, you know,
that ends up making us biologically unique.
Yeah, and I'm going to ask you about uh
twins and twin studies later in our conversation, but
I mean, how much, uh, because when we talk
about bio bio biological variation in humans, many times
people Immediately bring to the table variation between human
populations. So how much biological variation is there really
between any two human populations? Is it, is there
really a lot of variation or not?
Uh, THERE'S some, but in every case, uh, the
difference is smaller between the averages. THAN it is
between any two people. And so, one thing that
we teach a lot in my, you know, in
anthropology is that, uh, something like 90% plus of
the genetic variation that we see across the human
human species is within, within groups, right? And the
other 10% is sort of between groups. And so,
if you think about the sort of bell-shaped distributions
of genetics, you can think about it that way
as kind of a heuristic. Those, the meat, the,
the Means can be a little bit different, but
there's so much overlap, right? That if I had
to pick two individuals from any one group, I'm
just as likely to get as much genetic difference
as I am, the difference between averages of between
two groups. Yeah.
So with that in mind, and of course I
have to address this issue because you're very well
aware that even nowadays people use these terms and
there are people who still do or try to
do race science. So is race a good enough
proxy for biological diversity? I mean, is it even
a scientific concept?
Yeah, yeah, it's terrible, right? I mean, the, the
one of the reasons I wrote this book is
that the way that we think about genetic diversity
or biological diversity in the US anyway, and I
think this is becoming more and more global, is
we think about it in terms of, of race
categories, right? That somehow, if I know that, you
know, in America, it's black, white, Hispanic, we have
these, these, these blocks of racial categories. Um, THEY,
they're basically useless, right? Now, people say, well, but
the skin color is different, right? Between your black
and white people, for example. Well, that's true. In,
in that one, in that one, trait, you can
see differences on average between groups. Not always, by
the way, but you can see differences in, in
like one trait or another trait. That doesn't mean
that genetically, these whole groups are different or that
they're even coherent groups, right? That, so, there's so
much variation within what we call in the, in
the United States, what we would call white and
what we would call black, that it, it's a
meaningless category. It has no edges biologically to make
any sense. It's a socially constructed category. Uh, AND
so, right, the, the way that we talk about
variation biologically is just nonsensical in the US. It's
one of the reasons I wanted to get this
book, uh, out there.
Yeah, uh, one very interesting thing that you talk
about in the book that I was sort of,
uh, not expecting it, and it's interesting because, because
it also ties to some very current, uh, political
issues in the US actually. So, uh, I mean.
During intrauterine development, when does life start exactly? I
mean, from the moment of fertilization, when exactly in
our intrauterine development can we say that life has
started?
Yeah, well, I'm glad you asked the question. Uh,
YOU know, the, as I wrote this book, um,
I wanted people to understand how our bodies work,
and that's the foundation of how we get to,
to biological variation, and all these big topics. And
I, I formatted the book the way that I
would teach this class, you know, we would take,
if we wanna understand the human body, we'd start
at the very beginning, we work our way all
the way through. Um, AND as I was writing
these chapters, I realized, OK, we're not gonna be
able to talk about the body and then talk
about the politics. We're gonna have to talk about
the politics every chapter because everything, you know, whether
it, whether it's brains, whether it's immune systems, whether
it's the heart, whether it's digestive, whether it's embryology.
Every piece of our body carries a socio-political debate
right now. Um, I don't know if it's always
been that way, but it certainly is these days.
Uh, AND so the embryology story, I think, is
a great way to start. Um, IN the, in
the US anyway, there's a lot of, of debate
and, and conflict about, you know, this idea of
when does life begin? Does it begin at the
fertilization of an egg? Does it begin later? And,
you know, one of the points I make in
the book is this, this, it's There's really not,
we, we talk about it as when does life
begin. That doesn't get it quite right because life
is some billions of years old on this planet.
Each of us, every animal, every organism alive today
is a, a part of that unbroken chain of
life that's billions of years old. So when does
life begin? Well, you're a little bit late because
life has started billions of years ago. Yeah. But,
of course, that's not what people are really asking.
What people are really asking is, when does this
clump of cells become a person? Right? And then
that's a much more complicated question because that's no
longer a bio a biology question, right? That's, if
we ask what's a person, then that's um an
ethical, religious, political question. Um, AND those are important,
but to talk about it as though it's a
clean-cut biology question is, is actually not right. Um,
NOW, we can get to the question of when
is it you, when do you become a person,
right? Um, WELL, OK, if If, for example, we
want to say that uh you are a person
as soon as the egg is fertilized. Well, that's
interesting because the egg, by that point is already
as old as mom is because eggs form in
her embryology, right, when she was in utero, and
the sperm is much more young. So, is that
individual as old as mom or is it as
old as that moment when the fertilization happens? If
personhood happens at fertilization and we start then and
go the clock forward, then when does personhood, does
that fertilized egg to people, if somehow in the
future it's gonna become twins? Right, right. What happens
when we have two fertilized eggs that join together
that happens sometimes, it's called chimerism. Are those two
people that become one person? Right? If that, if
that embryo as it develops, if it, um, you
develop it as a sort of a tube, and
then your head ends up on one end of
the tube, your other side of you, the other
end of you ends up on the other side
of the tube, A funny thing could happen if
if it splits at the head end and you
end up with two heads. Right? But just one
body, we would call that, we would call that
two people, we call it conjoined twins. If it
happens the other way and you got two sets
of legs and one head, we'd call that one
person with two, so, you know, it's, it's no
clean-cut answer would really work, but I think what
we begin to understand is what we're really talking
about is, is heads. Right? A functioning brain that
can give you a functioning personal, you know, personality
and mind. OK. And I think that's clarifying then
because we're not talking about some clump of cells.
We're actually talking about the ability to do what
you and I are doing at some level, which
is to, to communicate.
OK, and when exactly would that be in intrauterine
development? I mean, what week are we talking
about? We're talking, well, for it's a fuzzy, it's
not a, it's here one day and it's not,
you know, it's not here today and it's there
tomorrow. It's the brain development is continuous. Um, BUT,
you know, in terms of the electrical activity in
the brain that we can measure that we think
means your brain's awake and moving, um, that doesn't
really happen until, you know, somewhere in the 20th
to 30th week is when we begin to see
activity that you might say, OK, that's, that's, uh,
you know, That, that has the kind of activity
that we associate with, you know, at least minimal
function of a human brain. And so, that happens
to be, by the way, around the same time
that, uh, you know, a fetus would be viable,
um, if it's prematurely born, for example, in the
25th, 26th week, that's really early, um, it's still
quite difficult to, to manage and dangerous for the
child. But, you know, that's around the time that
you've got viability. And so that kind of begins
to align with one common way we think about
this is, Whenever the fetus would be viable and
could survive on its own outside of the womb,
maybe that's when we wanna call it, we'll start
it then and that would, that would sort of
line up with the brain uh version, but, you
know, again, to, to pretend there's a sort of
very clean, easy biology answer is not right.
OK, so let me ask you now about height,
because I think that this is a trait that
we can also use as, as an illustrative example
to understand better how we should think about variation.
Among people and population. So, where does, uh, the
variation in terms of height that we see among
people and population stem from?
Yeah, I mean, height is the perfect example of
these, what we call complex traits. Most traits are
what we call complex traits. What a biologist means
by that is there's dozens or hundreds or even
thousands of genes, each of which contributes a little
bit. Right? We, we all know, probably that, you
know, if you have tall parents, you're likely to
have tall kids. If you have short parents, they'll
probably have short kids, right? So we, we intuitively
understand there's some, you know, genes that are passed
down. Well, it turns out it's not one or
two genes that affect your height, it's, it's literally
thousands, maybe over 10,000, uh, genes. Mm, um, and
each contributes a tiny little bit, right? So, um,
the gene variants that you got from mom and
the ones you got from dad, that's the hand
you're dealt, you put those together and that's what
your sort of genetic possibility is, your genetic potential
is. But then, because this is, again, the classic
complex trait, you've got all of your childhood development
that's gonna affect your height as well. So nutrition
is the big one. But as a piece of
that, if you're sick a lot as a kid
and you can't, your body is spending energy fighting
infections and can't spend it on uh growth, for
example, those lead to to differences there. Um, BUT,
you know, think about what that gives us, right?
If we have, um, if we have Look at
a population of people, right, the folks that you
grew up with, right? You probably know short folks
and you know, tall people, right? You know, and
by the way, it's not just height, right? All
of our body shape, it functions this way. So
face shape is the same way, you know, hand
shape, all of the, all of the growth that
gives you your form plays by the same rules.
So height's is the obvious, easy one to measure,
but all of it would be that way. Um,
YOU, you know, growing up, the people in your
population are, some are tall, some are short, whatever.
There are average differences between populations. But that's a
much smaller difference, you know, the average height of
people in France versus the average height of people
in, I don't know, Kenya. It's, there's some difference
there, I'm sure, on average, but the variation is
much bigger between any two individuals and between the,
the, the means. Um, AND then you get some
interesting cases where, uh, you do have local adaptation,
uh, where, you know, populations that I've been able
to work in, for example, it's incredibly hot and
dry. You're living in northern Kenya, um, you know,
where it's, there's hardly any rain, it's so, so
hot on the equator. And there's been selection over
time. To favor gene variants that gets you a
bit taller and a bit thinner. But that's very
localized, right? And it's not all Africans, for example,
even though that is an African population, it's population
specific. And so you do kind of have these
population variations in, in heights and, and weights on
average, on average, um, but those are sort of
small whispers of selection, uh, usually across the sort
of global variation.
Uh, SO tell us more about, uh, those local
adaptations because I, I imagine that another good example
of that that people many times notice has to
do with nose shape, for example, but, uh, I,
I mean, uh, some populations or people who are
descendants of some pop of some African populations tend
to have a wider nose than. Then the other
people, people who are mostly of, uh, who have
a white skin, let's say, of course this is
just proxies that I'm using, but anyway, uh, I
mean, what explains that sort of variation, for example,
in the nose shape and the shape of the
head, for example, and other facial traits.
Yeah, there's great science on this, that people have
sort of mapped the face of, you know, tens
of thousands of people around the globe and then
try to relate that to genetics. Uh, AND the
story is mostly noise. And so, you know, if
you have like a wide head versus a, a
long head, um, if you have high cheekbones, low
cheek, whatever, the shape of the eyes, as far
as we can tell, um, you know, there are
interesting local variations in that we all know, my,
my wife, her family is from China, so you
don't have to guess, you know, you know, she's
Asian, if you look at her, right? We, we
humans are very good at, at At noticing patterns.
Um, AND so, you know, I'm not gonna sort
of gaslight everybody and say that that's not real.
You can say, oh, that person looks like they're
from Asian descent, that person looks like they're from
African descent. And that's because of these variations in
shape and, and size, often of facial features, etc.
Yeah. Um, Most of that variation, again, it's just
noise. So, um, you know, if you think about
Uh, you know, think about a big bowl of
M&M's, right? You mix it all up. Um, SO
it's totally mixed. Those are your gene variants around
the globe. The, the, the M&Ms is your global
human variation of genes. But if I were to
pick up one scoop, I'm probably not gonna get
the perfect mix. I'm probably gonna get a clump
of oranges and reds, or I'll get a clump
of whatever, right? So, most variation in our shape,
our face shape, Head shape, that kind of stuff.
Is this a sort of local clumping for reasons
that just seem to be random and, and not,
not meaningful, functionally meaningful around the globe. Um, NOSE
shape is an interesting example of, of a, a
contrary example of that. It does, you can do
nice statistical tests when people map the face and
then correlate, you know, correlate to the, to the
genes. You can test if there's selection, if there's
been adaptation, and nose shape seems to be one
of these adaptation stories. Um, YOU see big Narrow
nostril noses in cold, dry climates. And it seems
like it's a, and, we know that a big
nose helps you humidify the air and also helps
you lose less humidity when you breathe air out.
So it seems like it's that story. Um, THE,
a, a wider nose is not just an African
adaptation, it's actually, if you look around the globe,
it's places where the air is warm and humid.
And that seems to be selected there. Yeah, yeah.
Um, FACE, you know, head shape, that seems like
it's noise. Um, SKIN color, that's adaptation, right? That
seems to be an adaptation to, uh, how much
sunlight you get, if you get a lot, uh,
then darker skin, that melanin, melanin is, is the
pigment that makes your skin darker. It acts like
a natural sunblock. So you want more of that.
We all make it, by the way, we all
make melanin. But you're selected to make more of
it in a place where the sunlight's intense. You're,
there, there's less selection to make less of it
where it's sunlight's less intense and you can use
more of that sunlight to make vitamin D. Um,
HEIGHT, there, like I said before, in Kenya, for
example, we see examples of, of local adaptation there.
So, there's some interesting stories. Um, What I would
say is, humans love to tell, we love to
tell adaptation stories. Everything's got an adaptation story, right?
I mean, I, when I was growing up, uh,
my grandparents would tell me all kinds of crazies,
oh, those people look like that because of X,
Y, and Z. It was always some story. Um,
AND it wasn't just sort of white, black, Asian,
it was like, the Irish people look like, you
know, it was a very hyperlocalized set of stories
about these adaptation stories. And, you know, some of
them were mean-spirited, some of them were not, they
were just how my grandparents understood the world, that's
how they were brought up. Um, ALMOST all of
those stories are totally bogus, yeah, actual adaptation to
local situations is pretty rare. Yeah.
So uh what would you say is then um
the role that the environment plays in biological variation?
Because I mean, one thing that tends to bother
me. At least a bit is when for example
the so-called hereditarians look at the average differences between
human populations and they immediately say or assume that
they have to be genetic or there, there have
to be genes involved and I'm not saying that
there's no genes involved, but uh what is the
role that the environment. Yeah.
The environment for almost any trait is an enormous
factor, right? Now, so there's a, there's a deep
history there. That, that question, as you know, right?
It, it, it swallows up a lot of history.
In the late 1800s, early 1900s, the world was
hereditarian. Everybody thought genes was everything, you know. Um,
AND so, then, if that's true, if it, if
the environment doesn't matter. Hm. What does that mean?
That means that anything that I see about a
population or a person that I don't like, I
go, well, that's their genes, right? And so, if
that's the case, if that's their genes, well, then
the best way to, to make a world that
I want. IS to make sure those people with
the bad genes don't have kids. Right? And that
goes to some really ugly places. That's, that's the
eugenics movement of the early 1900s that goes direct
line. You don't have to make up any stories.
That is directly what the Nazis used to develop
the policies of the Holocaust. In the United States,
that line of thinking where genes are everything and
environment doesn't matter. LED to sterilizations, um, and all
sorts of terrible, terrible human tragedies here in the
US. Um, SO, The pushback against that was. Hey,
look, no, environment really matters. Environment is a, has
a huge factor, you know, the, the first kind
of breakthrough was showing how important the environment was
for IQ, right? Uh, YOU know, people in the
1920s wanted to call all IQ variation genetic 1930s,
1940s, 1950s, we realized, no, no, no, no, no.
Genetics plays a very tiny role in IQ and
it's a huge environmental story, how you're raised up.
Right, our, our brains come into the world uncooked,
and we cook them in those first few years.
And the way they get cooked by the environment
is almost the entire signal uh in IQ. Yeah,
OK. Now you've got this interesting pushback, like you
say, there's these hereditarians who wanna say, no, no,
no, the environmentalists have gotten it wrong. Um, I
can prove to you that there's IQ differences that
are, that are, that's related to genetics. And if
I can prove that there's genetic influence in IQ,
then I win the argument, and we're back to
the 1920s, and everything's genetic again. Or, you know,
maybe, maybe they wouldn't go that far. Maybe they'd
say, well, environment matters a little bit, but not
really, you know, not, not, not enough to, to
really shape the story. OK, what? This is an
interesting time to be doing this kind of science.
We know now from, from really good genetic tests,
uh, genetic studies that there is, I mean, I
don't think this is a surprise to anybody, really,
but there's a genetic influence in IQ. It's small.
But if I have a population of kids, and
I can give them my, the same, you know,
that I raise them the same way, so they're
kind of, you know, from the same school, for
example, same community. Yeah. And I give them the
same test. Some kids are gonna do better than
others. We know this is, we know this. And
we know that it's some piece of that seems
to be due to their genetics, not just the
way they're raised up. Yeah. Yeah. That's true for
sure. And you, and the influence of genetics on
IQ, we, it's a, it's a bit of a
slippery term, but we call it uh heritability. Right?
In how you inherit things, it's a heritability.
OK, so what does heritability mean?
Yeah, heritability means how well, I mean, there are,
there are more than one, but there are mathematical
formulas that, that calculate heritability. So, in some very,
very careful quantitative way, heritability is the answer to
that equation. Uh, WE can get into the equation
if you want. But a better way to think
about it, more useful, uh, and all of the
equations that do heritability get at the same issue
is If all I know is your genetics. How
well can I predict? Your IQ in this case,
your height, all right, I can do the heritability
of anything. Mhm, um, AND so all I know
is your genetics. What gene variants you have. How
good of a job do I do at predicting
your IQ? And I could predict 0% of your
IQ, so heritability could be 0. I don't, I
can't predict it at all from your genetics. Or
a heritability could be 100% or 1, right? Mathematically
1 and 100% are the same thing. So it
could go from 0 to 1 or 0% to
100%. 100% means if I know your genetics, I
know your trait perfectly. Yeah. Mhm. There are some
traits like that. So, my blood type, if I'm
A, B, or O blood type, for all intents
and purposes, 100% heritable. If I know your genetics,
I can do your blood test and I know
they're gonna match. Height. It's, oh, well, we'll get
into twin studies versus um uh modern genetic studies
if we want, but we could say height's about
50 or 60% heritable, maybe up to 70% in
some populations. In other words, I can do better
than, I, I'll do better than guessing your height
if I know your genetics, but I still won't
probably get it exactly right for everybody. The modern
approach to measuring IQ heritability says. That inheritability for
those traits, for, for mental traits, not just IQ
but also things like your likelihood of, of depression,
your personality type. Mhm. Uh, THOSE heritabilities in the
modern approach of, of modern genetic science. ARE about
10%, maybe up to 15% sometimes. Um, YOU know,
people, people are gonna write in and say, no,
I think it's higher, no, I think it's lower.
But if you look across the data sets that
we have available, it's, I'm not too far off.
It's around 10, 15%. OK. Um, THAT means that
90% of the variation, I'm not catching with genetics.
Right? So that's, that's the sort of scale of
things here. So are the new hereditarians right? That
if I have a genetic component, then everything's genetics.
No, no. Actually, what the new genetics says is
most of it's not genetics. Now, here's the other
little thing that they never talk about, that the,
the hereditarians that I, as far as I'm concerned,
I've, I've never seen talk about seriously, uh, on,
in, you know, in the social media space or
whatever. Those tests, a heritability test, only works within
a population. I can only calculate it within a
population. Yeah. It does not port. If I know
that genetics accounts for about 10% of the variation
within this group, and I can prove that. That
doesn't mean That genetics accounts for 10% of the
difference between this group and that group that I
never measured, or even that I measured but in
a, on a different day with a different, you
know, setting. It doesn't work that way. It's, it
just doesn't. Um, AND so, the, the gotcha, ha
ha, there's a genetic component to IQ, and that
means that every, you know, the differences between, for
example, in the States, again, we're talking about, like,
student performance with white students and black students. Mhm.
Right? That's a big thing that comes up all
the time. Yes, people, and, and, you know, the,
the hereditarians will say, see, look, there's a difference
here. Black students don't do as well. And we
know from these careful studies within these populations that
it's hereditary, yeah, that there's a, there's a genetic
signal, and therefore, Those group differences are, are, no,
actually, you can't do that. That is not what
the test measures. It's a completely inappropriate use of
that, of that outcome. Um, AND so, Yeah. On
the other hand, you get people who are so
afraid that there would be any genetic component to
the IQ at all. The, the, the serious environmentalists
that don't wanna believe there's any genetic influence, and
they are, they are, those folks are around as
well. That they push back so hard against the
modern genetics work that you can't even have the
conversation because you have to be able to say,
no, no, no, there is a genetic component, there's
something. But it doesn't explain the difference. And so,
that's, I, I took a long time to answer
that question, but that's, I think it, it deserves
some, some nuance because it is a multi-part sort
of answer, right?
No, this is very interesting and it's good that
you explained, explained all of those aspects because it's,
I think it's important for people to get the
full picture of this issue because they, I mean,
particularly on social media, the discussions are completely messy
and all over the place and people push for
really extreme and sometimes dangerous views about population differences,
so. Um, LET me ask you now about another
topic. So, um, and this is, I want to
ask you about this because many times people on
the internet and elsewhere have discussions about what we
as humans have evolved to digest, and then we,
and then we hear terms like paleo. Diet or
natural diet or the kind of diet that our
uh Homo sapiens ancestors have back in the savannah
or someplace else so I mean uh what have
we really evolved to digest and uh is a
term like paleo diet scientific.
Yeah, that's, that's a great set of questions. Well,
you know, I've had the, the great fortune in
my career, uh, to be able to work with
hunter-gatherers in Northern Tanzania to actually live with, you
know, the Hadza uh community there for, you know,
and do work with them. Uh, WE work in
Northern Kenya now, so I've been, I've had been,
had the chance to be on the ground. You
know, living with folks who are living, if anybody's
living a paleo diet, right? It must be, uh,
hunter-gatherers who are hunting wild foods, hunting wild game,
and gathering wild plants. And what's immediately obvious to
anybody who's ever had a chance to see these
groups is it doesn't look like You know, the,
the Twitter version of the Paleo diet, right, at
all. Um, LOTS of carbohydrates in the Hatta diet,
including honey, which is just sugar. Um, AND it's
not just a sort of meat-centered kind of, a
thing that you often see talked about as a
paleo diet. Uh, WHAT'S wonderful is if you go
back to the ethnographies of a lot of these
groups. So there's a, you know, there's a history
of people. Exploring the world, uh, writing down what
they see, this goes back to at least the
1600s or earlier. And so, um, you know, you
get these wonderful accounts of these early explorers talking
about what people were eating because, of course, you
know, it was, it, they, they noticed and it's
a human thing to think about food and And,
you know, some of the stories are pretty boring,
but a lot of them are, like, will curl
your hair, the kinds of things people will eat.
People are eating rotten meat, they're eating bugs, they're
eating maggots that are crawling out of the food,
uh, you know, there's no cleanliness about how people
are treating their food in the sense that we
would think. Uh, AND so, that's the Paleo diet.
The Paleo diet is whatever you can find. Uh,
IT can be really high in carbs a lot
of the time. And if you're gonna go paleo
meat, then, you know, to be, to be true
to it, you'd have to eat lots of maggots,
I think.
OK, so, I, I mean, and also don't we
have to consider the fact that particularly in human
populations we have gone through, um, agriculture, I mean
we've gone through societies where agriculture was practiced, we
have specific adaptations to be able to digest things
like, uh, cereal, vegetables, milk. Eggs, beer, and so
on.
Yeah, uh, so there are some, there, there are
some genetic variants that seem to be, they have
become more common after agriculture, like you say, they
help us digest some of those foods, some of
those agricultural products for sure. So, you know, I
think there's good evidence that we're adapted to those
kinds of foods. Uh, YOU know, I would point
out that, you know, one of the, the, the,
the all meat and no grains school of thought
in paleo world. Uh, THEY often focus on the
Arctic populations, like, you know, the classic Inuit populations
living in the Arctic, above the Arctic Circle, eating
lots of meat. That's true. If you live where
there's no plants, guess what? You don't eat many
plants. Uh, AND humans are able to eat a
whole wide variety of things. And so in those
environments, yes, they eat a lot of meat. But
guess what? Those environments are actually not even as
old as farming. Farming is older than living in
the Arctic. Uh, FARMING is older than living with
herds of cattle, actually, the plant agriculture predates animal
agriculture by a couple of 1000 years. Uh, AND
so, you know, people have to pick and choose
the population that they like, uh, to support their
diet. I would say the honest way to do
it is to look at all these groups. And
realize, oh my gosh, you can eat almost anything
and be a healthy human. It's a matter of,
you know, the proportions you eat. Uh, I think
modern processed foods are a real problem, um, you
know, but the idea that it's, we should only
be eating meat or something like that is, is
silly.
OK, so let's tackle another controversial topic. Of course
nowadays with social media, I guess anything is controversial,
uh, but I mean, let's talk about sexual development.
How, how much variability is there in humans when
it comes to sexual development?
Uh, WELL, there's quite a bit. And so, you
know, the, the obvious variation is male versus female
development, right? So if you think about uh embryological
development, and the way that you develop in the
womb, In utero, uh, there's sort of two tracks
you can take. And, um, you know, some species
don't have sexes, right? Uh, THERE'S just one monomorphic
thing that just buds and just, you know, that,
that's how they propagate. Um, BUT sexual reproduction, where
you have a male and a female, you call
them whatever you want, but there's sort of two
options, two approaches, two strategies. Uh, THAT has actually
evolved several times, um, in the history of life.
And so, um, so humans as mammals follow the
same kind of thing. You're either on one trajectory
or another. Uh, IF you have a Y chromosome
that has this SRY gene, then you're gonna develop
in the, in the male way and you, you're
going at it develop as testes, uh, and all
the sexual anatomy that you develop is the male
anatomy. Um, IF you don't have the SRY gene,
um, There's no special gene that kicks off the
female uh anatomy, that will happen in the absence
of the SRY gene. So, sort of, if you
have SRY gene that's functional, There, OK, you, you,
a male. Now, people listening, some are going, oh,
of course, and some are going, no, you're not
getting the variation right because there's so many ways
that that can get varied and, and, and get
tweaked, and that's true too. That's also true, that
if I have an SRY gene. So I would
typically I'd be XY chromosomes. So you probably have
heard, your listeners have heard of XX chromosomes, XY
chromosome. You have a Y chromosome, the SRY gene
is typically on that Y chromosome. If it's active,
you start the male pathway embryologically, but there are
lots of steps along the way. And so one
of the things that happens initially is, um, as
the gonads develop the testes, they start making testosterone.
OK, but what if, what if you can't, the,
the cells that need to, to sort of hear
that testosterone, right? Because hormones are a signal and
a receiver. The, the reception, yeah, the, the, the
receptors might be broken. And so you're producing testosterone
normally, but the receptors don't function. In that case,
what you'll end up with is, essentially, I mean,
there, there's, again, there's variation in all these things,
but, but that, it's can happen that that person
will develop with female anatomy as far as anybody
can tell. Mhm. The gonads will be testes, uh,
they won't develop the full way, but they'll, you
know, from externally, that person will look female. OK.
Um, On the other hand, you could have XX
chromosomes, but you've had a translocated SRY gene. So,
genes, you know, get reshuffled as you make sperm
and egg cells. It's possible that the SRY gene,
it is very rare, but it could get shuffled
into a different chromosome. And so, you get XX
chromosome, you think, oh well, that's a female. It's
gonna develop into the female anatomy. No, but SRY
genes tag it along with some other chromosome and
kicks off the male development that way. Even if
an XX chromosome becomes a female. So, uh, it
becomes a, a male. All right. There are um
a lot of different variations. They are those kind
of anatomical developmental variations, uh, are, we call them,
they used to be called, you know, disorders, sexual
developments. Now they're called the differences in sexual development.
Um, THOSE sort of, so, you know, consequential variations
are pretty rare, right? The, there's been a lot
of selection to get it right because obviously, we're
all descended from sexually reproducing ancestors. And so there's
been a lot of, of, of selection to get
that, to kind of fine tune those things so
that you don't get this variation. But not, no
biological system is perfect, um, and it's perfectly precise
and accurate. And so, you get this variation that
happens. Um, OK. So what's the variation sexually? Well,
the first big thing is male-female. We can talk
about the variations across and the ambiguities there if
you want. Um,
BUT, but male female biologically, is it defined by
the gametes that they produce, or is it any
other criteria?
Uh, THERE'S only It's sort of the anatomical strategy.
OK. And the reason I'm gonna say that is
it's not just the gametes you produce because, I
mean, if that, if that, if we go by
the gametes you produce, Hm, and we. Let me
back up one more thing. There's only two pathways
here. Sometimes they get muddled, so I'm not gonna
say that you can't sort of have, you know,
ambiguous anatomy and physiology. You, you can. But that's
ambiguity. Between or among two pathways. There really are
are, there's not a third pathway. There are two
pathways OK. We have to think of them as
processes. If you try to hang it on one
trait, gamete production, OK. That seems like a pretty
obvious one. How could you you get that wrong?
There are only eggs and sperm, by the way,
so there you go. Fine, but um the typical
male development. The, you know, uh, uh, when a
boy is born, a male, uh, uh, uh, is
born. They don't produce gametes. You don't produce gametes
until puberty. So is that organism that was born,
that child, is that not a male until puberty?
He's not producing gametes, huh. Uh, ON the other
side, if, uh, you know, a woman grows up,
has kids, typical female woman anatomy, whatever the, the,
the classic typical case. And then, for some health
reason or something like that, has her ovaries removed.
Mhm. OK. Does she's not a female anymore. She
doesn't produce. She doesn't have gametes. Or what about
post-menopause when you're, the ovaries shut down? Do you
stop being a female? So, to say like, oh,
it has to be gamy, it's OK, well, actually,
you've just created more problems than you thought you
were solving because there are these weird complications, right?
And so, um, again, this is a little bit
like the IQ story. I, I find both extremes
really frustrating, right? In the IQ story, we said,
well, if you think it's all genetics, you're wrong.
And if you think it's all environment, you're also
wrong. I'm sorry. Uh, WITH sex, and then we'll
talk about gender too, which is sort of a
separate issue. Um, IF you say, Well, there's, you
know, sex could be anything and there's so many
sexes or something like that, or it's not, it's
not kind of a male and female process. Well,
that's not really true. There's a male set of
processes and a female set of processes, and yes,
absolutely, those can get muddled and there can be
differences of sexual development. 100%. I agree. Uh, BUT
they're really, those are, those are variations that happen
on two lines, and there really is just two
lines. There's not a third. OK. Um, ON the
other hand, to say, aha, you agree there's only
2, and that means So there's no, uh, well,
now, OK, no, you've gone too far that way
too. We have to explain and understand it and
also appreciate the variation as well. I don't know.
Sorry, biology didn't develop to be easy.
00, OK, but then let me ask you because
you're talking about two extremes. Yeah. Do you think
that there's people who argue on biological grounds? That
sex is not binary. Do you think that they
have a good enough scientific argument to make there?
I, I understand what they're arguing. What they're focusing
on. Is the fact that. Um, YOU can have
this kind of muddled development that ends up with
differences of sexual development. They're focusing on the fact
that, um, That there's really just a couple of
genes on that, that track you on the male
pathway. And that most of the genes that a
female or a male will develop from are shared,
right? So there's a, I mean, that's, that's why,
um, yeah, that's why so much is shared across
male and female reproductive physiology, that a lot of
the hormone pathways are shared, etc. Um, AND they're
focused on the fact that once we finally look
at an adult, And we look at things like
height or like strength, or like, and, you know,
whatever your measure is, um, there's a lot of
overlap. Mhm. And there's, so, from that perspective, it
doesn't look just like, you know, you, you could
make the argument, well, this is not just two
things. Um, SO I understand the argument. Um, AND
maybe I'm, I'm being a bit too simplistic with
it, but I think that's the foundation of their
argument. Mhm. Uh, I don't think it's helpful, actually.
I think it's, um, I think it's more. Helpful
and, and more based on the evidence to talk
about. Well, no, that there are 2 sexes, 222
processes of sexual development, a male and a female
process. Um, WE have to be honest about. You
know, differences in sexual development, that there are intersex
individuals that develop, yes, there are. And, and that's
an important piece of the physiology and let's understand
that and not just ignore it. Mhm. Um, THERE
are also, you know, then we'll talk about gender
too, I hope, and that's the way that people
live their lives, you know, isn't neatly defined by
their, their anatomy, like the what your mindset, Ricardo,
you know, if I were, if you were to
give me your genes, I wouldn't know that you
were gonna become a podcast. You know, producer. Uh,
HOW would I, how would I know that? And
I don't know how you live your internal life
and if you feel like, you know, you're, you're
very male or whatever. I, I have no idea.
I don't know how you live your life and
I would never know that from your genetics. Um,
AND so, uh, so we have to be honest
about the complications too. But it doesn't help. Uh,
MY, my frustration is With people who often have
this sort of progressive, yeah, often the, the politics
are very progressive and, and, and what they want,
I think, uh, to hear them make the argument
is they want people to be respected and to
be able to live their lives how they want.
And I want that too. I think, I hope
we all do. Um, BUT I think to kind
of muddle the biology to get us there is,
is a little bit of a mistake.
Mhm. But, but I mean, even if, uh, saying
that sex is not a binary, uh, is not
helpful or perhaps we can or even yeah, but
even if it's not helpful or even if you,
we want to say that it's not true. Uh,
SOME of the arguments, at least used by people
who argue for a non-binary sex, uh, are good
scientific arguments that we have to take
into
account,
I mean, you know, I'm sure you could find
lots of examples that wouldn't be good biology, but
yeah, the people I hear arguing it. They're not
wrong about their view of the biology, right? There
is intersection divisions that developed. There is this variation
that happens in the system. There is a lot
of shared anatomy and biology between male and female.
Yeah, that's correct. Yeah,
OK, so that's sex. Uh, GENDER now. So what
is the difference between sex and gender, and, uh,
I'm very interested in hearing this from you because
since you're an evolutionary anthropologist, I mean, people would
tend to think about you as someone who is
more interested in perhaps the more biological aspect of
things and the cultural anthropologists would be more interested
in. Uh, SOCIAL constructs like gender and so on,
so, but, but, what is your take on gender?
Yeah, well, it's, I mean, it's a very real
thing. Uh, YOU know, the way that you, we
organize our societies, we write, we, we, we grow
up and the way we see the world, uh,
there's a gender component to it, for sure. And
that's across cultures. Everywhere I've ever lived or worked
or traveled, right? There are masculine things and feminine
things and masculine people and feminine people. Uh, AND,
you know, women and men everywhere, you go to
a Hadza camp, there's men and women, there's nobody,
you know, has, so that's a human universal. Now,
what's interesting is, um, yeah, I, let's start with
what people usually ignore, which is that this mindset
that we By the way, we don't really completely
understand how the mind develops and, and, and becomes
this mind, uh, from the neurons in your head,
right? That's called the hard problem in psychology, uh,
and consciousness. Sorry, we don't really have a great
explanation for it, but what we, what we observe
when we look around the world is that the
consciousness that you and I and everybody shares, there's
a component to it that's gendered, male and female.
Uh, AND what's remarkable is that 95% of the
time plus, uh, maybe 99% of the time, uh,
that mindset. ALIGNS with your biology, with your anatomy
and physiology. Isn't that remarkable? That's crazy, right? That
almost all the time, if I see a child
born and I say, oh, that, that, that child
is male anatomy, male physiology, typical development, I will
be 99% right if I say, I bet that's
gonna, he's gonna grow up and, and live his
life as a man. Mhm. That's remarkable. That's crazy.
Uh, SO, I mean, it's not crazy in the
sense that the whole system evolves to support sexual
reproduction. That's why it evolved. Uh, AND you can
only have sexual reproduction if you have males and
females that wanna interact and, and recreate and reproduce.
So in that sense, it's not crazy, but just
as a physiological observation, wow, that system is really
Uh, you know, in tune, well calibrated. Yeah. It
is also true, and this again. I'm sorry, but
this is also true that everywhere we've ever had
big samples and big populations to look at, there
have been people who don't align. Right, who have
male anatomy and physiology, but go through life, uh,
and really, you know, their consciousness, their mindset, they're,
they feel like a woman. Mhm. Uh, AND there's
people, some people who don't feel like either strongly,
right? There's, you get the, the spectrum. Um, AND
it's not. Common. You know, probabilistically, statistically, but it
does happen everywhere we've ever had good data and
big populations to look at. Uh, AND so that
seems to be part of, of human, the human
developmental system as well. And that's interesting because humans
are the only species that your mind has such
a huge role in so many aspects of your
life, right? Like your dog and cat and the
birds outside and, you know, they don't have these
rich internal minds as far as we know, that
like dictate everything about what they do, but we
do. And so that becomes your, your gender is
a part of that. Uh, AND, yeah, that's some
funny and interesting things here. There, people would say,
oh, it's completely divorced from your physiology. That, you
know, the gender that you decide to, that you,
that you feel is you. Has nothing to do
with your biology. I don't, that doesn't actually fit
the data as far as I see it. First
of all, there's this 99% matching issue, or 99%
of the time it actually, it does. That's a
clue that there's some physiology there and how our
minds create our genders. But there are also cases,
uh, where, I mean, some of these are don't,
some of these are, are, uh, you know, they're,
they're sort of sad to consider how this all
happens, but, um, you know, cases where a child,
a male child is born and there's some, either
developmental issue or some kind of accident when they're
very little, and, you know, their anatomy gets, gets,
uh, you know, really hurt. So their penis gets
hurt or something like that. And so there have
been in the past, an approach to say, OK,
well, what we're gonna do is remove that anatomy.
Do an operation to make the child externally look
male, sorry, look female, and raise that child as
a girl. Right, it's not common, obviously, thank goodness.
But when it, when that's happened, Um, a really
large percentage of those girls. They're, they're males, they're
raised as girls grow up to have, you know,
gender dysphoria. I, I think that would be the
term where they feel male, they feel like, like
boys and men, and they have this anatomy that
is female externally. Uh, AND so that's a clue,
I think, that actually, you know, the biology does
seem to shape the mind in ways that, you
know, that probably happened even before you're born in
that last, into your adulthood. Um, THERE are cases
that go the other way too. So the point
being, That this mindset that we have is not
totally divorced from our biology, it just isn't. Uh,
BUT we don't really understand. Entirely how it works
either yet.
OK, so with all of that in mind, how
should we think about trans people? How do they
fit into the picture of variability in terms of
gender identity?
Yeah, well, I mean, again, anytime we've ever looked
historically or today in populations that are, we have
big populations to see this because it's, it's not
a huge percent of the population. Mhm. They're a
part of us. They're a part of, of the
human experience is some people will have transgender identities.
Um, AND I think, you know, what I would
like to see, I think what a lot of
people like to see is that people would be
allowed to live how they feel and not, you
know, have to conform to some other person's view
of how they ought to act. And how they
ought to believe they, they, they should live, um.
And that's a legitimate authentic way to that we
see humans developing around the world and through time.
Mhm. OK, so, uh, I mean, I, I have
two more topics I wanted to ask you about,
but actually I have a third one because this
is, this is something that has also become relevant
in the, uh, current American context, um. How do
vaccines work and why are they important?
Yeah, uh, so vaccines are one of them, have
to be just. Maybe the single greatest scientific breakthrough
ever. I mean, it's, it's, it's kind of amazing
what they do. Your immune system is a great
example of, of an environmentally influenced piece of your
physiology. It's not just humans, any, any system with
an immune system. IS trying to battle bacteria and
viruses that replicate really fast and evolve really fast,
and so, you have to be born, if you
have an immune system. You're born with a system
that can adapt because there's no way that the
parents, your parents' generation is gonna be ready, you
know, you're not gonna, they're not gonna give you
genes that are gonna be very helpful for the
next generation of bacteria that are thousands of generations
evolved from what your parents experienced, right? So, your
immune system has, you know, it's like an army
with multiple pieces and components. And they're all ready
to, to go to battle with whatever they see
and whatever's new. Um, THERE'S a, a component of
your immune system that can remember when it gets
hit with a particular bacteria or virus or pathogen.
Uh, AND that's really important because maybe you'll get
really sick this time and hopefully, you survive it.
But next time, you won't get sick or as
sick because your immune system will remember, oh, we
fought this one before. And, uh, you know, if
you've heard of antibodies, these are anti, the antibodies
kind of smother these viruses and flag them. I'm
ready to make the right antibodies for that particular
bacteria. It'll fit like a key in a lock.
To get that particular bacteria and, and take it
out, so next time I don't get as sick.
Yeah. OK. So there's this memory, there's this learned
component of your immune system, really remarkable bit of
evolution, and it, humans have it, lots of uh
mammals have it generally. Uh, IT'S, it's, anyway. We've
figured out. Before we even really understood how immune
systems work, this is hundreds of years ago, people
figured out that if you get sick. Either with
a weakened version. Of a particular disease. Or with
a related disease, that's, it's a very similar but
not exactly the same kind of a disease. That
that will train this learned immune system response in
a way that when you get sick with the
real thing, you're ready. Mhm. That's great because now
I don't have to pass through this illness of
being super sick and maybe dying or maybe being
injured for life. Uh, TO get the immune the,
the immune memory. I can, I can bypass that.
And this was, you know, the initial smallpox, smallpox
vaccines that you might have heard of. This is
like, you know, 1,500s, 1600s. People in the Near
East, people in North Africa, people in Asia figured
this out. They would take the scabs, some people
would get sick and they, you know, they develop
these pustules or whatever, you'd pick a little bit
of the scab and you'd grind it up and
you'd blow it up the nose of a, of
a kid or somebody who, you know, and, and
that would get them a little bit sick and
their, their immune system would learn to recognize that
pathogen and they learned immune system was ready for
when they really got sick. All these cool ways
of, of figuring out how to do this. OK,
uh, George Washington. INSISTED, for example, that his troops
get the smallpox vaccine because uh it would allow
them to not get smallpox when it passed through
and, you know, we keep them healthier as they're
trying to battle the British. That's an important early
story here in the US. Uh, FOR some that
that has always been contentious. So, because people don't
really understand how it works, I think, or they
are misinformed about how it works. Uh, It's always
been contentious. So back in the 1700s when George
Washington was making people, making his troops get a
smallpox vaccine, There were riots in Boston about getting
the smallpox vaccine. People were trying to, you know,
push back even then. And, uh, and then, you
know, smallpox would wipe, would, would pass through Boston
and kill a lot of people who didn't have
vaccines and, and people who were vaccinated were protected.
Uh, SO it's a story again and again and
again, and we just saw it now with COVID.
And now we're seeing it with this whole rethink
about how vaccines work here in the US. And
um, it's an age-old story. I've, I, I don't,
I know where the fear comes from, people are
intentionally stoking these fears, uh, that vaccines are bad,
and that's been something people have been stoking since,
again, since at least the 16 1700s. Uh, THERE'S
a lot of fear about, anyway, you ask how
vaccines work, that's how vaccines work. They, they, they
train your learned immune system. Uh, WE can talk
about mRN mRNA vaccines or something like that if
you want, but that's, that's the answer.
Yeah, I mean, one thing that really frustrates me
is that some of the claims made by, I
think it's fair to call them anti-vaxxers. Some of
the claims made by them, like, for example, that
vaccines cause autism or that mRNA vaccines are not
safe. I mean some of these things, even more
so autism because we have had more time to
uh study that. I mean they've been thoroughly debunked
and people keep, keep bringing it, bringing it up
as if it was uh still a valid scientific
question.
Right. Yeah, I mean, you know, that you hear
again and again, well, none of these vaccines have
been tested. Yeah, that's not, that is simply not
true. Uh, AND so if you hear that claim,
it's either by somebody who doesn't know the literature
and, and know the decades of modern, um, excellent
science that have tested all these vaccines, um, or
they're intentionally, you know, uh, misinforming you. So you
have to decide if you're being intentionally misinformed or
the person just doesn't know. Uh, BUT no, all
these have been my, you know, the, in writing
this book, I, I thought, OK, well, let's be
an open-minded person here and let's ask the question.
The COVID vaccines, right? This is the, the COVID
vaccine is the first time in history that this
Nobel Prize-winning technology was rolled out, this mRNA vaccine.
Um, MRNA vaccines, they put a little bit of
mRNA into your body. That makes a protein. So,
all of your DNA, the, the, the classic way
DNA works is you have a gene, it makes
an mRNA molecule, this long mRNA molecule that goes
and acts as a template to make a protein.
Right, that's the classic central dogma of DNA. Um,
THE mRNA system uses that. That, you know, uses
those mechanics and says, well, you don't have a
gene that's gonna make the right kind of protein
that, that the bacteria makes or that virus makes.
And so we're gonna give you the mRNA molecule.
It's gonna float in there, act as a template
to make a protein, and the protein that makes
is the protein that the virus usually has on
it. And so, uh, great. So now you've had
this protein floating around that looks like the virus.
It's just the protein though. It's not a full
virus. It can't actually make you sick like a
virus would. Yeah. And then your immune system can
learn to recognize that. And now you have learned
immunity. You have the, the vaccine response. I fairly
smart. I mean, so smart and so uh clever
and effective, incredibly effective. Um, BUT, you know, it
is a new technology. And so I thought, well,
there's all these concerns and people are saying it
leads to heart inflammation or, you know, increased all-cause
mortality. And so, look, I'm a scientist, uh, I,
I will be led by the evidence. And so,
great. So I would encourage anybody to go to
PubMed or wherever you find your science and actually
look at the, the actual articles. That have tested
this in 10s of thousands of people, 100s of
thousands of people in the adult cases, 10s of
thousands of children. There's no, there's no elevated risk
from that vaccine. And, uh, you know, they are,
are incredibly safe and effective. Um, AND in any
case, you know, they're way safer, more effective, they're
way safer than getting COVID, for sure. Uh, AND
so, um, you know, I think we can have
an argument about, a discussion about, well, was the
rollout done right? Was the discussion about what they
were gonna do? Cause I think You know, maybe
they were overpromised here in the States. People said,
well, if you get the COVID vaccine, you'll never
get COVID. That's not really what vaccines do. They,
they don't stop you from getting the, the illness.
They stop you from getting really sick from it.
Like they, they reduce your likelihood of dying or
going to the hospital, in which they absolutely, COVID
vaccines absolutely do. Uh, BUT you can still get
the virus into you, right? The, the vaccine actually
can't do anything until it, you know, you have
the virus on board. So, um, you know, maybe
there was problems with the rollout, maybe there were
problems with the politics of it, um, but it
has become this flashpoint that it just didn't never
have to be.
Yeah, so let me just ask you about one
last topic because I'm getting mindful of your time,
so, um. Now there are a few people out
there that are really worried about when they're dying
and they want to try to live forever. I
mean, do you, do you think that it would
ever be possible to live forever? I mean, what,
why do we have biological limits on our life
expectancy?
Yeah, because, so, so that first part is the
easiest answer, I think, is, uh, the reason that
all organisms have a lifespan and, and die is
that energy and time are limited. That's how all
species have evolved in a time and energy limited
space. That's the world that we live in And
so resources are limited. You can spend them on
reproduction. Or you can spend them on survival. You
kinda can't spend them on both cause those processes
physiologically are just different processes. You gotta pick. Yeah.
Uh, AND so, um, You, every, every organism has
this balance. I'm gonna spend some on reproduction, some
on survival. A really long-lived species, well, what that
tells you is they're spending a lot of their
resources on survival, and there's probably some reduction in
how much they can spend on, on reproduction. So,
some, yeah, they, they can't spend so much on
reproduction. Mhm. Uh, WHEREAS an animal that, that's sort
of, you know, a mouse, for example, you can
do whatever you want with a mouse, treat it
as well as you can, give it the best
veterinary care, it still is gonna die after a
year. I, I don't know how long they live,
a few years at most. Um, BUT they reproduce
a lot, right? Lots of mouse puppy, mouse pups,
and, and, and so that's all reproduction, no survival
versus all survival, no reproduction. You'll never have all
survival, no reproduction. That can't evolve because evolution favors
reproductive success. Right? So if you never, if you
never reproduce, you're a dead end, evolutionarily. Um, So
we're all kind of built with an expiration date.
Right? We all will be done whenever evolution has,
you know, the, the hand we've been dealt from
evolution is. To, to be done at some point.
And that reflects the trade-offs that our bodies make
that we can't control, uh, and how much we're
gonna spend on, on maintenance versus reproduction. So that
that's the easy answer there. Are we ever gonna
live forever? Well, There are animals that live a
long, long time compared to us, you know, whales
can live a couple 100 years. It sounds like
some sharks can live like 600 years at least.
So we could live a lot longer. Um, But
that would require like a wholesale change in our
genetics. Right? So just like, you could, there are
animals that live twice as long. OK, can we
do that? Well, I don't know, that's the same
as asking, could we engineer ourselves to grow twice
as tall. Right, right. I mean, maybe, I don't
know, uh, to say never, it seems, uh, look.
Science develops at a really breakneck pace. I mean,
maybe, but it will, it would require an incredible
rewrite of our genetics, not just, you know, some
supplements and get to bed at 8 o'clock and,
you know, that's, it's, it's gonna be more than
that. Uh, AND so the folks who wanna live
forever. Man, I, good luck. I hope so. I
hope, I, I wish you the best. Um, AND
I hope that along the way, they discover some
cool science that we can all share, um, and
not just the, the billionaires. Um, BUT I'm skeptical.
I think, yeah, again, it would be the same,
it's the same as asking, can we grow twice
as tall? And the answer is, It's probably not
gonna happen with supplements. And a, and a, and
a workout routine and making sure you get to
bed and don't eat too much. I mean, that's,
that ain't gonna grow you twice as tall either.
Um, IT'S probably not gonna get you to live
twice as long.
Yeah, and I mean, of course it would be
great if we could double our lifespan. Let's say,
OK, so now we could live up till 240
years old, 250, but that's one thing, but to
live forever, I mean, that's a completely different ball
game, right?
Yeah, forever is a long time, and uh, yeah,
forever sounds pretty impossible. Yeah.
OK, so let's leave it there, Doctor Bonzer, and
the book is again adaptable, how your unique body
really works and why our biology unites us. I'm
leaving a link with it in the description, and
uh would you like just to tell people where
they can find you on the internet?
Sure, uh, you know, the social media sphere, I'm
just Herman Poner, you can find me pretty easily.
Uh, AND, you know, you can check out the
lab website if you wanna see what we're up
to these days. And, uh, otherwise, look for me
on amazing discussions like this.
OK, so thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
really fascinating conversation.
Thanks for having me. It was really fun.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
John Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.